Calculus Chain rule and product rule (#183)
3b1b/3Blue1Brown.com: public/content/lessons/2017/chain-rule-and-product-rule/index.mdx

/>

Then, introducing a small nudge $dx$ to the input of the function, you can measure the change in the area highlighted in yellow below.

<Figure
  image="figures/constant-multiplication-area-df.svg" 
/>

In the case of $g(x) = \sin(x)$ and $c = 2$ we know that $d(g(x)) = \cos(x) \cdot dx$. This gives us a change in area of $df = 2 \cdot \cos(x) \cdot dx$. Solving for $\frac{df}{dx}$ we get that the derivative is $2\cos(x)$.

</Accordion>

## Chain rule

Aside from addition and multiplication, the other common way to combine functions that comes up all the time is function composition. For example, let’s say we take the function $x^2$, and shove it inside $\sin(x)$ to get a new function, $\sin(x^2)$. Or, in other words, the output of the function $x^2$ gets fed as input to sine function.

What’s the derivative of this new function?

Here I’ll choose yet another way to visualize things, just to emphasize that in creative math, we have lots of options. I’ll put up three number lines. The top one will hold the value of $x$, the second one will represent the value of $x^2$, and the third line will hold the value of $\sin(x^2)$. 

<Figure
  image="figures/chain-rule-x-1-2.svg" 
/>

> That is, the function $x^2$ gets you from line $1$ to line $2$, and the function sine gets you from line $2$ to line $3$.

Reviewer: This particular image feels like it requires more explanation to really get the hang of. (The question immediately after is great for catching any lack of understanding, but it currently feels like the question is too difficult without a bit more guidance on what the image is showing.)

It might be enough to just show a video clip of the 2nd and 3rd number lines responding to changes in the value of x.

Or maybe it would be useful to walk through, in concrete numbers, why the number line values are what they are. Something like...

"In the image, I'm showing an x value of 0.5 on the first number line. So the second number line, which just displays x^2, is showing the number 0.25. The third number line shows sin(x^2), which is really just the sine of the previous value, so sin(0.25) ≈ 0.247."

<Question

>   question="What is the value of the composed function given the input $x=2$. To get a hang of this visualization technique, go from the first line to the second line to the third line."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  question="What is the value of the composed function given the input $x=2$? To get a hang of this visualization technique, go from the first line to the second line to the third line."
```

  choice1="$\sin(2) \approx 0.909$"
  choice2="$\sin(4) \approx -0.757$"
  answer={2}
>

<Figure
  image="figures/chain-rule-x-2.svg" 
/>

Using the number line visual, start on $x=2$ and move to the next line using the function $g(x) = x^2$. Plugging in $x=2$ into the function we get $(2)^2 = 4$ on the next numberline which we then feed into the outer function $h(x) = \sin(x)$. 

</Question>

> As I shift that value of $x$, maybe up to the value $3$, then the value on the second shifts to whatever $x^2$ is, in this case $9$. And that bottom value, being the $\sin(x^2)$, will go over to whatever the $\sin(9)$ is.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As I shift that value of $x$, maybe up to the value $3$, then the value on the second shifts to whatever $x^2$ is, in this case $9$. And that bottom value, being the $\sin(x^2)$, will go over to whatever $\sin(9)$ is.
```

"The" makes sense when spoken, but seems weird to me when written.

<Figure
  image="figures/chain-rule-x-3.svg" 
/>

> So for the derivative, let’s again think of nudging that $x$-value by some little $dx$, and I always think it’s helpful to think of $x$ starting as some actual number, maybe $1.5$. And $dx$ as some small number that I imagine approaching zero, maybe $0.1$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So for the derivative, let’s again think of nudging that $x$-value by some little $dx$. I find it helpful to imagine $x$ starting out as some actual number, maybe $1.5$, and $dx$ as some small number approaching zero, like $0.1$.
```

Again, the transcript from the video feels weird when written. Changing the words a bit makes it easier to read, at least to me.

<Figure
  image="figures/chain-rule-dx.svg" 
/>

> The resulting nudge to this second value, the change to $x^2$ caused by such a $dx$, is what we might call $d(x^2)$. You can expand this as $2x \cdot dx$, which for our specific input that length would be $2(1.5)dx$, but it helps to keep it written as $d(x^2)$ for now. In fact let me go one step further and give a new name to $x^2$, maybe $h$, so this nudge $d(x^2)$ is just $dh$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting nudge to this second value, the change to $x^2$ caused by such a $dx$, is what we might call $d(x^2)$. You can expand this as $2x \cdot dx$. For our specific input that length would be $2(1.5)dx$, but it helps to keep it written as $d(x^2)$ for now. In fact let me go one step further and give a new name to $x^2$, maybe $h$, so this nudge $d(x^2)$ is just $dh$.
```

<Figure
  image="figures/chain-rule-dh.svg"
  caption="The fact that $\sin(h)$ is moving left while the $dh$ bump is to the right just means that this change $d\left(\sin(h)\right)$ is some negative number."
/>

> Now think of that third value, which is pegged at $\sin(h)$. It’s change $d\left(\sin(h)\right)$; the tiny change *caused* by the nudge $dh$. Well, we know the derivative of sine, so we can expand $d\left(\sin(h)\right)$ as $\cos(h) \cdot dh$; that’s what it means for the derivative of sine to be cosine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now think of that third value, which is pegged at $\sin(h)$. Its change is $d\left(\sin(h)\right)$, the tiny change *caused* by the nudge $dh$. Well, we know the derivative of sine, so we can expand $d\left(\sin(h)\right)$ as $\cos(h) \cdot dh$; that’s what it means for the derivative of sine to be cosine.
```

Since the nudge on the third line represents the change to our initial function $df$ when we introduced the small nudge $dx$, we can rearrange the expression and this gives us the derivative of the function.

<Figure
  image="figures/chain-rule-example-derivative.svg" 
/>

Notice what we have here, we have the derivative of the outside function, still taking in the unaltered inside function, and we multiply it by the derivative of the inside function.

<Figure
  image="figures/chain-rule-annotated.svg"
/>

Again, there’s nothing special about $\sin(x)$ and $x^2$. If you have two functions $g(x)$ and $h(x)$, the derivative of their composition function $g\left(h(x)\right)$ is the derivative of $g$, evaluated at $h(x)$, times the derivative of $h$. This is what we call the “chain rule”.

<Figure
  image="figures/chain-rule-general-annotated-alt.svg"
  caption="The chain rule for the function $f(x) = g(h(x))$"
/>

> Notice, for the derivative of $g$, I’m writing it as $\frac{dg}{dh}$ instead of $\frac{dg}{dx}$. On the symbolic level, this serves as a reminder that you still plug in the inner function to this derivative. But it’s also an important reflection of what this derivative of the outer function actually represents.

Reviewer: The text here says dg/dh and dg/dx, but in the image the notation used is d/dh[g]. I think that difference could be confusing for someone new to calculus. I think it's probably best to just change the text to match the image notation.

Remember, in our three-lines setup, when we took the derivative of sine on the bottom, we expanded the size of the nudge $d(\sin)$ as $\cos(h) \cdot dh$. This was because we didn’t immediately know how the size of that bottom nudge depended on $x$, that’s kind of the whole thing we’re trying to figure out, but we could take the derivative with respect to the intermediate variable $h$. That is, figure out how to express the size of that nudge as multiple of $dh$. Then it unfolded by figuring out what $dh$ was. <!-- I'm not sure about "unfolded here" -->

> So in this chain rule expression, we’re saying look at the ratio between a tiny change in $g$, the final output, and a tiny change in $h$ that caused it, $h$ being the value that we’re plugging into $g$. Then multiply that by the tiny change in $h$ divided by the tiny change in $x$ that caused it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So in this chain rule expression we’re saying to look at the ratio between the tiny change in $g$ and the tiny change in $h$ that caused it. (Where $h$ is the value that we’re plugging into $g$). Then multiply that by the tiny change in $h$ divided by the tiny change in $x$ that caused it.
```

## Summary

So those are the three basic tools in your belt to handle derivatives of functions that combine many smaller things: The sum rule, the product rule and the chain rule. I should say, there’s a big difference between knowing what the chain rule and product rules are, and being fluent with applying them in even the most hairy of situations.

I said this at the start of the series, but it’s worth repeating: Watching and reading about the mechanics of calculus will never substitute for practicing them yourself, and building the muscles to do these computations yourself. I wish I could offer to do that for you, but I’m afraid the ball is in your court, my friend, to seek out practice.

What I can offer, and what I hope I have offered, is to show you where these rules come from, to show that they’re not just something to be memorized and hammered away; but instead are natural patterns that you too could have discovered by just patiently thinking through what a derivative means.

In the next lesson, I’ll be talking about related rates.

## Exercises

> ### $\sin(x)^2$

Reviewer: This is a brilliant exercise. I love it.

As a fun exercise, think about the derivative of $\sin(x)^2$. First, use the chain rule, thinking of this as shoving the function $\sin(x)$ into the function $x^2$, then taking the derivative of the outside multiplied by the derivative of the inside.

Then, think of it using the product rule, interpreting it as $\sin(x) \cdot \sin(x)$, and think about how this relates to the visual for the derivative of $x^2$ shown in the last video. That should give a deeper feel for the chain rule.

<Accordion title="Chain Rule Explanation">

> Setup three numberlines to represent the function composition and nudge the input $x$ by a small amount $dx$. Remember we are interested in finding $df$, the change to the function represented on the bottom number line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setup three number lines to represent the function composition. Then nudge the input $x$ by a small amount $dx$. Remember, we are interested in finding $df$, the change to the function represented on the bottom number line.
```

<Figure
  image="figures/exercise-1-chain-rule-setup.svg"
/>

> Substitute $h=\sin(x)$ into the function composition. This simplifies $(\sin (x))^{2} = (h)^{2}$ and we know the change of the function $h^2$ given some small nudge $dh$ is $2h \cdot dh$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Substitute $h=\sin(x)$ into the function composition. That way, $(\sin (x))^{2}$ becomes $(h)^{2}$. And we know that the change to $h^2$ caused by some small nudge $dh$ is $2h \cdot dh$.
```

<Figure
  image="figures/exercise-1-chain-rule-substitution.svg"
/>

Unfold the composition and observe that $dh = \cos(x) \cdot dx$, because we know that the change in sine is $d(\sin(x)) = \cos(x) \cdot dx$.

<Figure
  image="figures/exercise-1-chain-rule-unfolding.svg"
/>

This gives us that the change to the function is $df = 2 \sin(x) \cdot \cos(x) dx$ which we can rearrange for the derivative of the function.

$$
\frac{df}{dx} = 2 \sin(x) \cos(x)
$$
 
</Accordion>

<Accordion title="Product Rule Explanation">

> To model the derivative of this function start by visualizing the function as the area of the square with side lengths $\sin(x)$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To model the derivative of this function, start by visualizing the function as the area of the square with side lengths $\sin(x)$.
```

<Figure
  image="figures/exercise-1-product-rule-area.svg"
/>

Then, imagine nudging the input of the function $x$ by a small amount $dx$. This introduces three new rectangles of area.

<Figure
  image="figures/exercise-1-product-rule-area-df.svg"
/>

> From past chapters we know that the expression $d(\sin(x))$ is $\cos(x) \cdot dx$. Using this information we can express the chang ein area of the function as shown below. As before, the small rectangle's area in the bottom right corner is negligible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From past chapters we know that the expression $d(\sin(x))$ is $\cos(x) \cdot dx$. Using this information we can express the changing area of the function as shown below. As before, the small rectangle's area in the bottom right corner is negligible.
```

<Figure
  image="figures/exercise-1-product-rule-derivative.svg"
/>

> 

Reviewer: This seems like a nice place to mention explicitly that both methods give the same result. Seeing the same result is the point of doing the same problem using two different methods, so it seems worth mentioning.
